with the different presidents and chancellors,
there were no sharp changes in the way the office
operated, except gradually became more
demanding in terms of the high school record and so
forth. Can you think of any decisions that now,
with the gift of hindsight, that might have been
made that would have improved anything?
Entirely your opinion. Not really. I'm going back
to thinking about the changes that we made. I think
that, and this is from a management standpoint,
the biggest changes that we made was instituting
the Student Management Information System,
SIMS, I think we call it. in which the whole record,
the admissions and records keeping thing was, I
would say, computerized, to use a better word on
the thing. But it's a process in which the
application, from application to graduation is
now kept in a uniform records system which you can
follow the student from the very beginning until
the time that they graduate. It was quite
interesting how we came about selecting a
particular process because when we started doing
this, we were way behind the curve, so to speak.
Many schools already had this in operation. We
opted to not go into it at the very beginning, I
suppose, because we wanted to We were satisfied.
We had a system which was working well, although it
was a little bit cumbersome, but it was working
well. And we decided to let it wait a while. And I
don't recall the time, but it seemed like around
1985 was probably when we started the SYMS system
at that time. And we, at that time, visited a number
of vendors, and it was interesting to see their
proposals and programs and everything. got the
operation. It took us about a year to really get the
programming and everything done. It was a major
undertaking, but really well planned through the
computer system, computer department, I guess it
was. And we had great cooperation and everything,
and it worked, as I recall, really fairly well from
the very beginning. I don't think we had many
hitches because we had planned and worked so hard
on it and laying good foundation with it. Were
there any heroes or heroines that were supporters
of that decision to bring it about? Anybody that
deserves a pat on the back for supporting it? Oh, I
suppose, and for the life of me right now, I can't
remember who
was our biggest supporter at that particular
time. I was thinking about Dr. Gage being in the
office, but I'm not sure he was in the office at that
time in the Vice President's office. Dean Gage?
Dean Gage.
He may have been there, but I do remember that we had
great support as far as getting people set up to
help us implement the system and everything. I
don't know who to give the credit to. Bob Lacey, you
probably know more than I. Bob was in charge of the
getting the whole thing, coordinating the whole
thing, and he did an excellent job from his
standpoint on the thing. We had good cooperation
from, again, other people, as I say, getting staff
set up in the SEM's office and so forth, and it
worked well. We would have never made it without
it. Who else are scattered around the campus were
good supporters of the work that you and your
associates? Well, I always felt like the best
support we had came from the associate dean within
the college. I forgot the term. It wasn't academic
council. It was the academic operations
committee, I believe was the term. But that was a
group I always enjoyed working with. They gave us
great support, and we try to give them great
support in working with their students on the
back. Who were your favorites in that group? Oh,
goodness. You have favorites, and you have some
that are not favorites. No, but you can mention the
favorites. I
really enjoyed working with all the associate
deans. I don't know that I would want to select one
over the other. They were all great. great people
to work with and, you know, additional staff in
there. We mentioned Dale Noble a while ago. Dale
was on there and people from the academic testing
office were on there. It's just a great group to
work with. Alright, in your own personal
recollection, what are some of your proudest
moments of the years you worked at A&M?
I think that the The nicest thing that I had is I had a
great staff to work with the whole time I was there.
You mentioned Ms. Mitchell, Mr. Gilwood, Mr.
Harvey Strigler, Ms. Luna Dean, they were the four
heads of my department. And Ms. Jean Ringer, we
added the international on later on. And they were
the heads of the departments. They were just
exceptional to work with.
I think the greatest accomplishment that we had
that really helped us more was getting CEMS in
operation. Because, I mean, we were floundering
as far as paperwork was concerned. It used to be
when early days, if you wanted to look for a file, if
you called for it and got it within 30 minutes or an
hour, you were lucky. After we got CEMS in, if we
called it up and it wasn't on the screen in five or
ten seconds, we thought, my goodness, it's
terrible because it's so slow.
We had,
again, most of the time the office was, the work
which we did was just great. I had often mentioned
to people, you know, I really never looked for a, in
moving to another director's admission job,
because I didn't think it was any better than what I
had here. We were very fortunate in that as we grew,
we had facilities to take care of the students. We
had a good building program there, but we didn't
have to cut back on the enrollment too early on.
Eventually, we got to the point where we did. And
once you get to that point, it gets a whole lot
tougher. I enjoyed the freedom, which I always
felt I had, to make the decisions, to run the office
and everything. I appreciate Ed's guidance there
and Gary's whenever he came and took over. a very
enjoyable experience. Again, it would be hard to
name the people that you enjoy working with
because there were so many. Do you remember any
particular events that you're delighted that you
were there to witness? Any kind of event? Were
involved in missions or not?
Gosh, I don't know what that would have been. As we
mentioned a while ago, I always went to
graduation. I missed one graduation, I think, in
22 years. That was because I was sick. But I always
had a part in the graduation ceremony, and
therefore I went to, whether we had three a year or
whether we had seven a year, I went to every one of
them. And that's one thing I always enjoyed going
to. I don't think I... They never feel any
resentment as part of the job, but I really, I
probably would have gone otherwise, I think. But I
really enjoyed that, just to see the students, the
parents, and the faculty members that did too, and
the joy of seeing them reach their goal and getting
there as one with me and them. Okay. What advice
would you give to current and future AM
administrators about commencements? I think the
greatest thing we do is having it like we do, where
the student gets their diploma, walks across the
stage, gets recognition from parents, fellow
classmates, and faculty. I think this is the best
thing we do. I got my master's and doctorate from
another institution, and it was a stand up and sit
down affair. I think it's just one of the nicest
things we do to let the parents have the experience
of seeing their son or daughter receive their
diploma from an individual president of the
university in this case. And I think they leave
that last official act in their relation with A&M,
I think the whole family leaves there feeling
good. They've got the diploma, they don't have a
facsimile, they've got the real diploma. One of
the little touches that Dr. Williams used to do
that I copied wherever I went was near the end when
he would ask the parents of the first generation
graduates to stand. And that was always touching
because you'd see some women reaching for their
handkerchief to dry a tear because I am one of those
and I know how special it was to my parents that I got
to go to college. Let's see, anything that you can
think of that you would change, you would have
changed? Oh, there's probably a lot of things I
would have changed and done differently. But I've
always, I view it just like I did with a lot of
things, kind of raising new kids. I think I did the
best I could under the circumstances with the
knowledge I had at that time. Are there any
organizational changes or...
decision path changes, you'd...
There are, again, a lot of different ways you can
decide on, if you're talking about the admissions
process, how you can do it.
Like, where does that report now? It reports... Is
it still academic? Still reporting to the It's
still academic. It's still courts of the provost,
and I think that's where it should be. I think it's
an academic function, and I think it should be
following that. I think it's at the provost level
is probably appropriate. I don't think it should
be at the president's level. I think he's got other
things to deal with.
I think that the organization which we had with the
dean and the admissions and the registrar work
fine. There may be times when it would be better,
and it depended on what the dean's function is,
whether it would be better or whether to have an
admissions and reporting directly to the provost
and a registrar. I didn't have any strong feelings
on that.
Let's see, we're getting near the end. Let's make
believe that somebody gave you a lot of money that
you are to give to A&M
a lot of money, hundreds of thousands of dollars,
but you decide what it's going to be used for, what
would you direct it to? Where would you put it and
for what purpose?
My personal feeling is it should probably go to
scholarships. Based on? not necessarily
academics. I mean, academic is a priority on the
thing. But there are many students, I think, here
who could do a whole lot better if they had a little
financial aid. And I would be looking to try to help
those. I think that Are you saying more
opportunity awards? The opportunity award type
scholarship, yeah. Those students who have
proven ability, lack of cash, and other support
possibly on the thing, which would help those out.
That's my, not my pet peeve, but that's my concern
for a lot of students. Would you restrict it as to
major? Would you link it to any particular major?
No, I wouldn't link it to major because I've seen
too many students change too many majors. Uh,
they, you know, students coming in, they just
don't have enough experience to know what they
want to be their major. And, you know, on a related
subject, they are, for that reason, I think
there's some merit in university colleges and
some other things of that nature, which you, it can
keep students, I think, from feeling, quote, that
they're a failure because they got in the wrong
field. Uh, having been in the wrong field myself at
one time, I can have some sympathy for that. All
right, can you share with this machine any amusing
flubs, goofs that you can remember that you or
somebody else on the staff did that were in
hindsight funny, amusing?
Something got lost for six months or somebody sent
the wrong thing to somebody? No, at the time I can
think it probably was funny, I think. I only
remember one thing, I think early on I made some
kind of a dumb decision about not admitting some
kid, and one of my staff members convinced me I
probably should have, and I remember going out the
door trying to find the kid, of course I never could
find him, but by that time he was long gone, I think.
Alright, Aggie stories. Can you think of a kind of a
poignant story to share? It'll get recorded.
Stories I don't remember. What's your favorite? I
can remember kids. I can remember what they did. I
can remember whatever else. Trying to remember
their names was the hardest thing in the world for
me. But I can tell you, a kid can come in a year later
and I can say, you came from so-and-so, you did
this, you did that. but I couldn't remember what
his name was. All right, what about, what's your
favorite Aggie funny story? You've got to have a
favorite that you enjoy telling. Well, let me go
back one other instance. I can tell you one thing,
which it tells you you never know what's going to
happen. Last spring at a baseball game out here, I
was going to a baseball game, a young man came up to
me and he says, hello, Dr. Lay. He says, you don't
remember me. My name is, and I think it was His last
name was Castro, and I can't even remember. But he
says that I still remember when you helped me get
into A&M. He says, and then I, we started to
remember, because he had worked in the shop, and he
had a shop smith, and I had a shop smith. So we began
to get that, and I remember, and he is now head of, I
think, the vocational technical program for the
state of Texas. I forget what it was. But I... He had
not met admission requirements, and he was a local
boy from Bryan, and we talked for a while and said,
well, we'll just see what you can do. And that was
one of my better choices, I think. I made a good
decision on that. When you were getting down to the
decision on those marginal admits, Did you want
there to be a face-to-face? Well, yeah, I always
wanted to. There was not always that. I realize
sometimes distance would... Right. But I always
wanted a kid to come in, and I could talk to him
man-to-man, man-to-woman, whatever the case may
be on the thing. It helped when you can talk to them,
I think. It gives them a chance to present their
side of the story. A lot of times, I thought the best
decision was, no, not now. Mm-hmm. But again, the
philosophy was we're not denying you admission to
A&M. We're trying to give you a route that you can
graduate from A&M. And I think as long as we used
that, for the most part, the students left
reasonably satisfied. Obviously, they wanted to
come or they wouldn't have made the effort to even
come for an interview. But that's the philosophy
we tried to follow. What else should we, have we
left anything out that we should have covered? I
don't know of anything. I think we've covered a
whole lot more than I thought we were going to.
Alright. My problem is I don't remember a lot of
stories on the things. Alright, let's conclude
with this. As you look back now, those 22 years,
what do you think was your responsibility?
What role do you think you and your staff played for
Texas A&M?
I think that our role was to try to select a group of
students who could come in to Texas A&M and be
successful. Successful in this sense was that
they could receive their bachelor's degree from
Texas A&M. Any other success they have might be,
that's up to them. But what we wanted to do and what
we would like to do is to select X number of students
and four years later have them receive their
bachelor's degree. That's not realistic for a lot
of reasons, I think. But we felt like our job was to
try to select students who could
best use the facilities which we had here. That is,
they could profit by the faculty, they could
profit by living here, all the other things which
go to make up the education process. Did anybody at
any other group at A&M have any responsibility
more important than the one y'all had? Well, I
think that the faculty had a tremendous
responsibility once we got them here. But was it
more important than y'all's? See, I think y'all
were the quality controllers. Well, I think that
we were. I think it was our job to make a select the
group, and then somebody else takes and nurtures
them and can go on from there. How are you? Good.
Let's quit with that.